Mission / Vision
Home|About Us|Mission / Vision
NRLM VISION
Vision
SRLM’s agenda is to reach out, mobilize and support all poor rural in the state into their self- managed SHGs and their federal institutions and livelihoods collectives Its long-term dedicated sensitive support would be with them and extend facilitation support in all their efforts to get out of poverty. It transforms itself from ‘for the poor’ to ‘of the poor and by the poor’. It works on three pillars – enhancing and expanding existing livelihoods options of the poor; building skills for the job market outside; and nurturing self-employed and entrepreneurs (for micro- enterprises). In addition, the poor would be facilitated to achieve increased access to their rights, entitlements and public services, diversified risks and better social indicators of empowerment.

NRLM Mission
“To reduce poverty by enabling the poor households to access gainful self-employment and skilled wage employment opportunities, resulting in appreciable increase in their incomes, on asustain able basis through building strong grassroots institutions of the poor.These institutions enable and empower the poor households to build-up their human, social, financial and other resources, solidarity, voice and bargaining power. They, in turn, enable them to access their rights, entitlements and opportunities.”

NRLM Guiding Principles
The following principles guide all NRLM operations:

Poor have a strong desire to come out of poverty, and have innate capabilities.
To unleash the innate capabilities of the poor, social mobilization and building strong institutions for the poor is critical.
An external dedicated and sensitive support structure is required to induce the social mobilization, institution building and empowerment process.
Facilitating knowledge dissemination, skill building, access to credit, access to marketing, and access to other livelihoods services underpins this upward mobility.
Core Values
The following core values guide all activities and staff of SRLM:

Hope (that Poverty is eradicable) and Faith (in the innate capacity of the poor).
Inclusion, Participation and Ownership (and meaningful role for the poorest/poor and their institutions in all project processes – planning, implementation and monitoring).
Transparency and Accountability (of all processes and institutions)
Community self-reliance and self-dependence;and
Integrity (of highest order) Staying, being and working with the poor (ensuring most/majority of their time with community) is non-negotiable for all staff in UPSRLM.
Livelihoods Services
Mode of Operations
The NRLM operates in a Mission mode. This enables in:

Making it possible for the states to formulate their own livelihoods-based poverty reduction action plans, relevant to the State context and grassroots development imperative.
Focusing on targets, outcomes and time bound delivery.
Continuous capacity building, imparting requisite skills and creating linkages with livelihoods opportunities for the poor, including those emerging in the organized sector, and
Monitoring of the targets set to reduce poverty. As NRLM follows a demand driven strategy, the States have the flexibility to develop their livelihood-based perspective plans and annual action plans for poverty reduction. The overall plans would be within the allocation for the state based on inter-se poverty ratios.